# (BP) Theory, Formal Models, and Data

Theory(1) and theory(3-7) all have an important role in sociology, but theory(2) is the one non-theorists use more often and actively develop. Theory(2) is defined by \textcite{abend_meaning_2008} as ``an explanation of a particular social phenomenon". A way to produce better and more interesting explanations in sociology starts by shifting some of the debate from theory to theorizing \parencite{lizardo_end_nodate}. There are multiple approaches to theorizing, from theory construction \parencite{stinchcombe_constructing_1987} to more naturalistic perspectives \parencite{swedberg_art_2015}. Another approach is represented by the modeling tradition \parencite{lave_introduction_1993, page_model_2018}. I argue here that the formal models advocated by this tradition can be useful for sociologists in general when used within the context of discovery. Simple formal models can play a double role there. First, formal models facilitate communication among collaborators and help explore and compare theories. Second, the same models can be reused to test statistical models. 


Formal models can be seen as an instrument for the theorizing process. As \textcite{lizardo_end_nodate} notes, the shift from theory to theorizing consists of ``moving away from a conception of theory as finished products and move towards a conception of theory as a set of generative skills geared to the creative production of theory". Formal models are one of such ``generative skills". This one in particular is useful because of the special position it takes in the metaphysical to empirical continuum. I understand ``formal models" as a subset of the more general group of models used in sociology and other disciplines \parencite{godfrey-smith_models_2009,giere_how_2004}. Formal models can be mathematical or computer models \footnote{Technically, Schelling's segregation model would not be either of these, but I doubt many people work physically through their models.}, and include things like agent-based, Markov, and generative network models.

Advantages of formal models in sociology and other disciplines are well-known. Formal models help make ideas sharp and assumptions explicit, they give us the power to simulate collective emergence and approach complex processes. Some problems with the use of formal models are also known, like our tendency to confuse generative sufficiency with understanding or explanation \parencite{leon-medina_analytical_2017}. But because most model-talk comes from modelers (specialized sociologists) not enough emphasis is made on how models can be useful for most other sociologists. 


The first role of formal models in the process of theorizing is to compare between two fictions \parencite{godfrey-smith_models_2009}. Arguing about ideas shaped into models through the medium of words is often frustrating, especially when interlocutors proceed from very different theoretical perspectives. In that situation, interlocutors might resort to bogus arguments in order to gain the high ground. One such argument is to ask for nuance \parencite{healy_fuck_2017}. A related one consists on claiming that the discussant's model is unrealistic, or that ignores ``the evidence". To be clear, models need to be put to test with empirical evidence. But when comparing two fictional models, we often all too quickly resort to that argument, without noticing that what we think of as ``evidence" has been generated from our particular model. For instance, economic models of human behavior are often dismissed out of hand by sociologists based on the argument that ``culture" or some other sociological concept ``matters". Because most successful models have some evidence on their side, this argument, when our goal is to discuss the potential of a model to explain some particular phenomenon would lead to the dismissal of all possible models. If everything matters nothing matters. These two types of arguments are also common for formal models. But by making theoretical presuppositions intelligible to the uninitiated interlocutor (at least more so than ``word models") formal models set the ground for fruitful debate between fictions. Although I do not have the space to go into detail, the \textcite{goldberg_beyond_2018,goldberg_associative_2021} - \textcite{dellaposta_complexity_2021} debate is an example of this (the Bruch \& Mare - van de Rijt, Siegel, Macy is a good one too). 


The second role of formal models in the context of discovery is in comparing a fiction with a physical system. Formal models are generative, meaning that they can create data (synthetic data). Then, the statistical models that we use to test our theories on empirical data can be tested on the synthetic data. If the statistical model cannot extract the evidence that we hope it would from our synthetic data, that is a good reason to suspect it cannot do it with the real data either. Testing statistical models by simulating distributions of variables and the relationship between them is common, but testing them with synthetic data from a generative process model is not, and it is a harder test for the statistical model and for our ideas (there is a similar point in \citeauthor{martin_thinking_2018} 2018). 

One last word of caution. When working with formal models, and agent-based models in particular, is all too easy to fall into the trap of adding complexity to the model to offset a lack of interesting ideas. In general, an ABM's complexity has a negative quadratic effect on value, although the value of x that maximizes y depends on the problem at hand (\citeauthor{martin_thinking_2018} 2018 makes this case for ABMs in particular, and \citeauthor{healy_fuck_2017} 2017 for theory in general). The intrusion of physicists into the agent-based modeling of social systems has prompted an arms race towards increasingly complex (and boring) models that we need to avoid, especially if they are to be used in the ways suggested here. 